﻿add middleware documentation (#292)
eclipsesource/jsonforms2-website: content/docs/middleware.mdx

---
id: middleware
title: Middleware
description: middleware
---

import {
  DependentFieldExample,
  ControlledStyle,
} from '../../src/components/docs/middleware';

# JSON Forms Middleware

JSON Forms offers the option to employ middleware, allowing you to integrate deeply with JSON Forms and directly modify JSON Forms state.
This enables various use cases, for example to use JSON Forms in a controlled style and implementing custom data updates and validation methods.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::caution ATTENTION

Middlewares allow for very powerful customization of internal JSON Forms behavior.
Proceed with caution as it's easy to break core functionality if used inappropriately.

:::

```

**Action:**
Representing a user action or a triggered event, described by objects. Actions are the way to communicate with the reducer to request a state change.

**Reducer:**
A function that accepts the current state and an action as arguments, generating a new state based on the action. It is responsible for managing different action types and updating the state accordingly.

**Dispatcher:**
Serving as a mechanism for managing the flow of actions. In the case of JSON Forms, when an action is created, it is dispatched to the dispatcher, which then distributes the action to the reducer for processing.

JSON Forms' most important actions are: `INIT`, `UPDATE_CORE` and `UPDATE_DATA`.

`INIT` is triggered on initiation, setting up the initial state and validating the form.
`UPDATE_DATA` is triggered whenever data within JSON Forms is changed.
`UPDATE_CORE` is triggered, whenever props handed over to JSON Forms are changed.

## JSON Forms Middleware

When a middleware is handed over to JSON Forms, it will be called during dispatching instead of the regular reducer.
The middleware can apply arbitrary changes and therefore has full power over the JSON Forms state.

> The middleware's arguments are the current JSON Forms state, the disptached action and the default reducer of JSON Forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The middleware's arguments are the current JSON Forms state, the dispatched action and the default reducer of JSON Forms.
```

```js
interface Middleware {
  (
    state: JsonFormsCore,
    action: CoreActions,
    defaultReducer: (state: JsonFormsCore, action: CoreActions) => JsonFormsCore
  ): JsonFormsCore;
}
```

> The default reducer can be used in cases where the behavior of JSON Forms shouldn't be altered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default reducer can be used to apply the default behavior of JSON Forms for the action in question.
The following middleware has the same effect as not using any middleware:
```

Subsequently, we adjust the price fields based on the selected services and update the state with the newly calculated data.
We additionally override the `INIT` and `UPDATE_CORE` actions, in case the data prop passed to JSON Forms doesn't have the correct price set yet.

```js
import { INIT, UPDATE_DATA } from  '@jsonforms/core'

...
const middleware = useCallback((state, action, defaultReducer) => {
  const newState = defaultReducer(state, action);
  switch (action.type) {
    case INIT:
    case UPDATE_CORE:
    case UPDATE_DATA: {
      if (newState.data.services.length * 15 !== newState.data.price) {
        newState.data.price = newState.data.services.length * 15;
      }
      return newState;
    }
    default:
      return newState;
  }
});

...

<JsonForms
  data={data}
  schema={schema}
  renderers={materialRenderers}
  middleware={middleware}
/>
```

<DependentFieldExample />

### Using JSON Forms in controlled style

In this example, we'll look at a form that lets you choose your activity for the weekend and validates that activity based on the current weather.

> Using middleware, we'll implement this example in JSON Forms with a controlled approach, meaning data and errors are stored in the parent components state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using middleware, we'll implement this example in JSON Forms with a controlled approach, meaning data and errors are stored in the parent components state.

```

---
id: middleware
title: Middleware
description: middleware
---

import {
  DependentFieldExample,
  ControlledStyle,
} from '../../src/components/docs/middleware';

# JSON Forms Middleware

JSON Forms offers the option to employ middleware, allowing you to integrate deeply with JSON Forms and directly modify JSON Forms state.
This enables various use cases, for example to use JSON Forms in a controlled style and implementing custom data updates and validation methods.

:::caution ATTENTION

Middlewares allow for very powerful customization of internal JSON Forms behavior.
Proceed with caution as it's easy to break core functionality if used inappropriately.

:::

> In this tutorial, we'll introduce the JSON Forms reducer pattern and its key actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this chapter, we'll introduce the JSON Forms reducer pattern and its key actions.
```

`INIT` is triggered on initiation, setting up the initial state and validating the form.
`UPDATE_DATA` is triggered whenever data within JSON Forms is changed.
`UPDATE_CORE` is triggered, whenever props handed over to JSON Forms are changed.

## JSON Forms Middleware

When a middleware is handed over to JSON Forms, it will be called during dispatching instead of the regular reducer.
The middleware can apply arbitrary changes and therefore has full power over the JSON Forms state.
The middleware's arguments are the current JSON Forms state, the dispatched action and the default reducer of JSON Forms.

```js
interface Middleware {
  (
    state: JsonFormsCore,
    action: CoreActions,
    defaultReducer: (state: JsonFormsCore, action: CoreActions) => JsonFormsCore
  ): JsonFormsCore;
}
```

The default reducer can be used to apply the default behavior of JSON Forms for the action in question.
The following middleware has the same effect as not using any middleware:

```js
const middleware = (
  state: JsonFormsCore,
  action: CoreActions,
  defaultReducer: (state: JsonFormsCore, action: CoreActions) => JsonFormsCore
) => {
  return defaultReducer(state, action);
};
```

> In the following, we will explore two examples demonstrating how this middleware can be utilized to provide custom implementations for JSON Forms actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, we will explore two examples demonstrating how middlewares can be utilized to provide custom implementations for JSON Forms actions.
```

        newState.data.price = newState.data.services.length * 15;
      }
      return newState;
    }
    default:
      return newState;
  }
});

...

<JsonForms
  data={data}
  schema={schema}
  renderers={materialRenderers}
  middleware={middleware}
/>
```

<DependentFieldExample />

### Using JSON Forms in controlled style

In this example, we'll look at a form that lets you choose your activity for the weekend and validates that activity based on the current weather.
Using middleware, we'll implement this example in JSON Forms with a controlled approach, meaning data and errors are stored in the parent components state.

When an `INIT` or `UPDATE_DATA` action is triggered, we update the data in the parent's state and invoke our custom validation function, but return the original state in the middleware.
This way JSON Forms doesn't update its internal state. Instead, the data and errors from the parent component are passed as properties to JSON Forms.
In combination with the `NoValidation` mode, JSON Forms is entirely controlled by its parent component.

```js
import { INIT, UPDATE_DATA } from '@jsonforms/core';

> export const ControlledStyle = () => {
>   const [errors, setErrors] = useState([]);
>   const [data, setData] = useState({ activity: 'Snowboarding' });
> 
>   const validateActivity = useCallback((data) => {
>     switch (data.activity) {
>       case 'Snowboarding':
>         setErrors([
>           {
>             instancePath: '/activity',
>             message: 'No Snow',
>             schemaPath: '#/properties/activity',
>           },
>         ]);
>         break;
>       case 'Soccer':
>         setErrors([
>           {
>             instancePath: '/activity',
>             message: 'Too Cold',
>             schemaPath: '#/properties/activity',
>           },
>         ]);
>         break;
>       default:
>         setErrors([]);
>     }
>   }, []);
> 
>   const middleware = useCallback(
>     (state, action, defaultReducer) => {
>       const newState = defaultReducer(state, action);
>       switch (action.type) {
>         case INIT:
>         case UPDATE_DATA: {
>           setData(newState.data);
>           validateActivity(newState.data);
>           return state;
>         }
>         default:
>           return newState;
>       }
>     },[]
>   );
> 
>   return (
>     <JsonForms
>       data={data}
>       schema={schema}
>       renderers={materialRenderers}
>       middleware={middleware0}
>       additionalErrors={errors}
>       validationMode='NoValidation'
>     />
>   );
> };
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export const ControlledStyle = () => {
  const [errors, setErrors] = useState([]);
  const [data, setData] = useState({ activity: 'Snowboarding' });

  const validateActivity = useCallback((data) => {
    switch (data.activity) {
      case 'Snowboarding':
        setErrors([
          {
            instancePath: '/activity',
            message: 'No Snow',
            schemaPath: '#/properties/activity',
          },
        ]);
        break;
      case 'Soccer':
        setErrors([
          {
            instancePath: '/activity',
            message: 'Too Cold',
            schemaPath: '#/properties/activity',
          },
        ]);
        break;
      default:
        setErrors([]);
    }
  }, []);

  const middleware = useCallback(
    (state, action, defaultReducer) => {
      const newState = defaultReducer(state, action);
      switch (action.type) {
        case INIT:
        case UPDATE_DATA: {
          setData(newState.data);
          validateActivity(newState.data);
          return state;
        }
        default:
          return newState;
      }
    },[]
  );

  return (
    <JsonForms
      data={data}
      schema={schema}
      renderers={materialRenderers}
      middleware={middleware}
      additionalErrors={errors}
      validationMode='NoValidation'
    />
  );
};
```
```

---
id: middleware
title: Middleware
description: middleware
slug: /
---

import { DependentFieldExample, BackendValidation } from '../../src/components/docs/middleware';

# JSON Forms Middleware

> JSON Forms offers the option to employ middleware, allowing you to dive deep into JSON Forms and directly set JSON Forms state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON Forms offers the option to employ middleware, allowing you to integrate deeply with JSON Forms and directly modify JSON Forms state.
```

> This enables developers to use JSON Forms in a controlled style, implementing custom data updates and validation methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enables various use cases, for example to use JSON Forms in a controlled style and implementing custom data updates and validation methods.
```

> In this tutorial, we'll introduce the JSON Forms reducer pattern and its key actions.
> Through two examples, we'll demonstrate how middleware enables controlled and customized form interactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

In this tutorial, we'll introduce the JSON Forms reducer pattern and its key actions.
Through two examples, we'll demonstrate how middleware enables controlled and customized form interactions.
```

## JSON Forms Reducer Pattern and Actions

JSON Forms adheres to the reducer pattern for maintaining a consistent application state. The reducer pattern comprises:

**State:** Representing the current application state, encompassing all necessary data.

**Action:** 
Representing a user action or a triggered event, described by objects. Actions are the way to communicate with the reducer to request a state change.

**Reducer:**
A function that accepts the current state and an action as arguments, generating a new state based on the action. It is responsible for managing different action types and updating the state accordingly.

**Dispatcher:**
 Serving as a mechanism for managing the flow of actions. In the case of JSON Forms, when an action is created, it is dispatched to the dispatcher, which then distributes the action to the reducer for processing.

> JSON Forms most important actions are: `INIT`, `UPDATE_CORE` and `UPDATE_DATA`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
JSON Forms' most important actions are: `INIT`, `UPDATE_CORE` and `UPDATE_DATA`.
```

> `INIT` is triggered on initiation, setting the parameters and validating the form.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`INIT` is triggered on initiation, setting up the initial state and validating the form.
```

`UPDATE_DATA` is triggered whenever data within JSON Forms is changed.

> `UPDATE_CORE` is triggered, whenever properties of JSON Forms are changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`UPDATE_CORE` is triggered, whenever props handed over to JSON Forms are changed.
```

## JSON Forms Middleware

> JSON Forms intercepts the call to the JSON Forms reducer and instead calls the provided middleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a middleware is handed over to JSON Forms, it will be called during dispatching instead of the regular reducer.
The middleware can apply arbitrary changes and therefore has full power over the JSON Forms state.
```

Reviewer: Add a warning note here. There is a warning element in the website available.

Warning content:

Middleware support is a powerful concept, allowing new use cases in JSON Forms.
However with power comes responsibility as it's also easy to break JSON Forms unintentionally.

Any questions: Take a look at our community forum.

> The middleware acts as a reducer and can directly set the new state of JSON Froms. Warning: This deeply touches the JSONF Forms internals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The middleware, takes the current state and action as argument and returns the new state.
> In addition the JSON Forms default reducer is provided as agument:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The middleware's arguments are the current JSON Forms state, the disptached action and the default reducer of JSON Forms.
```

```js
interface Middleware {
  (
    state: JsonFormsCore,
    action: CoreActions,
    defaultReducer: (state: JsonFormsCore, action: CoreActions) => JsonFormsCore
  ): JsonFormsCore;
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Add an example here of a no-op middleware, i.e. a middleware which does nothing but call the defaultReducer

The middleware allows to entirely change the behaviour of the reducer, make changes on top of the default reducer or provide custom implementations for selected actions, while using the default reducer in all other cases, like in the example below.

```js
const middleware = (
    state: JsonFormsCore,
    action: CoreActions,
    defaultReducer: (state: JsonFormsCore, action: CoreActions) => JsonFormsCore
  ) => {
    switch (action.type) {
        case INIT: {
            //do whatever you like
            const newState = customStateInit();
            return newState
        }
        case UPDATE_DATA: {
            const newState = defaultReducer(state, action);
            update(newState);
            return newState
        }
        default:
            return defaultReducer(state, action);
    }
  }
...

<JsonForms
  schema={schema}
  uischema={uischema}
  data={data}
  renderers={renderers}
  onChange={({ errors, data }) => setData(data)}
  middleware
/>

> ```

Reviewer: This example can be removed. It does not really help the understanding.

### Dependent Fields

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> In the following example, we'll explore a scenario where one field depends on another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, we'll explore a scenario in which one field depends on another.
```

For instance, consider a carwash service that offers various services and calculates a price based on the selected options.
We can utilize middleware to compute and establish the price. When an `UPDATE_DATA` action is triggered, we initially invoke the default middleware to update the data and identify any errors.
Subsequently, we adjust the price fields based on the selected services and update the state with the newly calculated data.

```js
import { INIT, UPDATE_DATA } from  '@jsonforms/core'

...
  const [data, setData] = useState(inputData);

  const middleware = useCallback((state, action, defaultMiddleware) => {
    const newState = defaultMiddleware(state,action)
    switch (action.type) {
        case INIT:
        case UPDATE_DATA: {
            if(newState.data.services.length*15 !== newState.data.price){
              newState.data.price =  newState.data.services.length*15;
            }
            setData(newState.data)
            return newState;
        }
    default:
        return newState
    }

>   });

Reviewer: make sure the code is properly formated

>   const [data, setData] = useState(inputData);
> 
>   const middleware = useCallback((state, action, defaultMiddleware) => {
>     const newState = defaultMiddleware(state,action)
>     switch (action.type) {
>         case INIT:
>         case UPDATE_DATA: {
>             if(newState.data.services.length*15 !== newState.data.price){
>               newState.data.price =  newState.data.services.length*15;
>             }
>             setData(newState.data)
>             return newState;
>         }
>     default:
>         return newState
>     }
>   });

Reviewer: There is no need to additionally maintain a state in this example
```suggestion
  const middleware = useCallback((state, action, defaultMiddleware) => {
    const newState = defaultMiddleware(state,action)
    switch (action.type) {
        case INIT:
        case UPDATE_DATA: {
            if(newState.data.services.length*15 !== newState.data.price){
              newState.data.price =  newState.data.services.length*15;
            }
            return newState;
        }
    default:
        return newState
    }
  });
```

...

  return (
    <JsonForms
      data={data}
      schema={schema}
      renderers={materialRenderers}
      middleware={middleware}
    />
  );
```

> <DependentFieldExample/>

Reviewer: Mention that if it's possible that new data is handed over to JSON Forms which does not follow this invariant, then the `UPDATE_CORE` action handling also needs to be overwritten.

> ### Backend Validation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Using JSON Forms in controlled style
```

In the following example, we'll look at a form that validates a secret code (1234) requiring verification by a backend service.
Using middleware, we'll implement this functionality in JSON Forms with a controlled approach.
The data and errors are stored in the parent components state.
When an `INIT` or `UPDATE_DATA` action is triggered, we update the data in the parent's state, invoke our custom validation function and then return the original state. 

> The validation function asynchronously calls a function from an API-service to validate the code. If the code is invalid, an error object is set in the state and passed to the 'additionalErrors' property of JSON Forms.

Reviewer: We should get rid of the arbitrary backend validation example. The use case should be that `data` and `errors` are managed by the parent component of JSON Forms.
Especially point to the `return state` statement as this disables internal state updates within JSON Forms. Thereby the state of JSON Forms is completely controlled from the outside.
